I. Political Transformation
1 | Stateness
Question
Score
The state´s monopoly on the use of force in principle prevails throughout the country
and is not seriously disputed by functional organizations such as guerrillas or
paramilitaries. However, organized crime related to drug trafficking has grown
significantly over the last decade, as Argentina has become not only became the
second-largest cocaine market in Latin America behind Brazil, but also a transit point
for drugs to West Africa and Europe. According to the InSight Crime website,
Mexican and Colombian drug cartels are believed to be operating in the country, with
corrupt police officers acting as domestic counterparts particularly in the northern
provinces close to Bolivia. Investigations by newspapers La Nación and Clarín
suggest that the state presence there and along the Ruta 34, also called the “White
Road,” is relatively minimal. In addition, money-laundering activities related to drug
money have become a growing concern, and even nearly led to sanctions by the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in 2011. According to La Nación, the national
unit charged with money laundering investigations (UIF) is ineffective.
Increasing levels of violent crime and the emergence of private security services
today threaten to erode or even overwhelm the state´s monopoly on the use of force
in urban centers, particularly Buenos Aires, the Gran Buenos Aires, and more recently
in Rosario, the largest city in the northern province of Santa Fé. Annual homicide
rates among 18- to 24-year-old males total an estimated 28 deaths per 100,000
inhabitants. In addition, federalism and so-called new security challenges sometimes
restrict the state´s monopoly on the use of force. In the poorer provinces, shortages
in funding and personnel have limited the state’s ability to act effectively, or even
undermined it by opening security personnel to the temptations of corruption. The
same difficulties led the Prefectura Naval and the National Police to strike for higher
wages in 2012. The deterioration of public security, mainly taking place in the urban
centers, has been one of the most disturbing phenomena since the crisis of 2001 –
Monopoly on the
use of force
8 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 6
2002, and has been a key issue in all national elections since the end of the 20th
century.
The large majority of the population accepts the nation-state as legitimate. All
individuals and group members have the right to acquire citizenship without
discrimination. No relevant group in society challenges the definition of citizenship
or the validity of the state’s constitution. A potential source of friction remains the
civil rights of indigenous people, including the Mapuche in the south and the Tobas
and Kolas in the north, who together represent between 3% and 5% of the total
population. Seventy percent of the country’s rural indigenous communities lack title
to their lands. Though land was returned to several communities under Néstor
Kirchner, most land disputes remain today unresolved. Forced evictions occurred
during the period under review, as for instance in Chaco Province. Indigenous
communities have been prevented from exercising their right to free, prior and
informed consent to projects involving the exploitation of national resources on
indigenous land. To date, however, while certainly a civil rights issue, this has not
led to a challenge of state identity. On the other hand, public awareness of this
problem is very limited. Only 3% of citizens are convinced that indigenous
populations suffer the most from discrimination within the country.
State identity
10
The constitution guarantees freedom of religion. Church and state are separated, and
the political process is secularized. However, the Catholic Church is subsidized by
the state and has authority on important issues. The political influence of the church
has diminished further under Kirchner and Fernández. Néstor Kirchner and the
Catholic Church clashed on issues including abortion, sexual education, human rights
violations and poverty. Cristina Fernández banished a British Catholic bishop from
the country because he denied the existence of the Holocaust and engaged in antiSemitic discourse. In November 2012, the Episcopal Conference distributed a
document complaining about restrictions on free expression and “excessive
caudillism,” or a centralization of personal power. The document provoked a
response by Vice-President Amado Boudou to the effect that nobody would be
interested in such a complaint.
No interference of
religious dogmas
10
The state’s fundamental infrastructure extends to the entire territory of the country,
but operates somewhat deficiently. The political administrative network and political
parties administer public funds, but the distribution follows particularistic,
clientelistic and nontransparent criteria. The weakness of the state and its institutions
is especially apparent in its inability to prevent rampant tax evasion, which has been
one of the population’s long-term responses to the corralito (the freezing of bank
accounts in 2001). The northern provinces are still burdened with longstanding
economic difficulties. These nine provinces are home to about 20% of the population.
Children in this region starve from malnutrition, in a country that exports foodstuffs.
The government’s cut in subsidies in 2012 and the growing pesification of the
economy affected the poor provinces particularly hard. There are no federal policies
Basic
administration
8 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 7
promoting development in depressed regions, and there are very few employment
opportunities outside the public sector.
2 | Political Participation
General elections are mostly free and fair, and are accepted in principle as the
appropriate means of filling leadership positions. Universal suffrage and the right to
campaign for office exist. Elections are administered correctly. However, there is no
independent electoral juridical body, and the distribution of public funds is
asymmetric in favor of the ruling party coalition. With some notorious exceptions at
the provincial level, governments respect the rules underlying open and competitive
elections. Some isolated attempts to manipulate elections have been investigated and
sanctioned, at least rhetorically. After the governing coalition’s electoral defeat in the
2009 midterm parliamentary elections, President Fernández promoted a political
reform with substantial procedural changes that in sum served to strengthen her own
power resources and limit her competitors’ flexibility of action. The same package
lowered the voting age from 18 to 16 years, a shift confirmed by Congress in October
2012. In July 2011, Fernández signed a decree creating open, simultaneous and
obligatory primaries, which were held for the first time in August 2011.
Free and fair
elections
9
In Argentina’s underinstitutionalized political system, individual power groups can
create their own separate domains or enact special-interest policies, albeit with
changing fortunes due to political cycles. Throughout the 20th century, three
corporate groups – the military, entrepreneurs and the unions – successfully exerted
undue pressure on incumbent governments. During the period under review,
Fernández had sufficient authority to govern, but the strongest labor organization, the
Confederación General del Trabajo (CGT), has gained increasing ability to act as a
veto power. Its political weight under the leadership of Secretary-General Hugo
Moyano, the president of the powerful Transporters’ union, has been reflected in
episodes of clear political defiance, escalating during 2012 in incidents such as a 24-
hour general strike on November 20.
Relations between the government and Argentina’s entrepreneurs have improved
with the recovery of the economy, but continue to oscillate between mutual
accommodation and a careful distance. The Kirchners’ strategy of growth through
the support of domestic industry has changed the relationship between state and
business, making the government vulnerable to pressures from domestic business
interests. The conflict with the agrarian sector and the growing mobilization capacity
of the unions are good examples of the growing veto power of social actors. Another
challenge for the government is the financial sector, which has pressed the
government to devalue the currency. The third significant corporation, the military,
is no longer a veto power in political affairs; its role has been reduced substantially
Effective power to
govern
8 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 8
since the beginning of the Menem administration and again since the beginning of
Néstor Kirchner’s government.
Citizens are free to establish political and civic organizations and assemble freely.
These rights are generally respected. Civic organizations are robust and play a
significant role in society, although some periodically fall victim to Argentina’s
endemic corruption. Union influence, strongly undermined during the Menem era by
neoliberal reforms, corruption scandals and internal divisions, gained negotiating
power with the economic recovery and the more flexible governing style under
Cristina Fernández. Beyond the established forms of interest group articulation, there
has been an emergence of basic organizations, self-help groups and other forms of
self-articulation and protest. NGOs monitor and influence government policy on a
variety of issues. They are generally free from legal restrictions and political pressure
from the state. However, their influence on the legislative process is modest, in part
because of the absence of a legislative agenda and of information regarding
committee meetings.
Association /
assembly rights
10
Freedom of information and the freedom of speech are guaranteed by law. However,
government influence over the media has grown since the Menem presidency. The
relationship between Néstor Kirchner and the conservative sector of the press,
including La Nación newspaper, deteriorated over time. During Cristina Fernández’
presidency, this hostility extended also to El Clarín, which in years before had been
considered a near-official organ of the government. Some journalists working for the
independent media have received threats. Kirchner and Fernández both characterized
critical media outlets and journalists as political opponents. A bill to regulate the
broadcast media, approved by Congress in October 2009, aims to promote a diversity
of views by limiting the ability of corporations to own large portions of the radio
frequency spectrum. In October 2010, commissions of the Chamber of Deputies
approved draft legislation presented by President Fernández to regulate the company
that produces and distributes paper used for newsprint in Argentina. In the same year,
both chambers of Congress debated bills to ensure public access to information held
by state bodies. During 2012, the media war sparked by the government’s effort to
dismantle the Clarín Group intensified without a final decision, with a final judgment
by the Supreme Court likely.
The state generally does not hinder free access to the Internet. Nevertheless, several
court decisions in 2010 and 2011 restricted access to specific websites based on
claims of defamation or intellectual property rights violations. In addition, a series of
injunctions imposed intermediary liability on search engines, forcing them to delete
links from the results presented to users. With 48% of its citizens counted as Internet
users in 2011, Argentina had the third-highest such rate in Latin America, after Brazil
and Mexico.
Freedom of
expression
8 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 9
3 | Rule of Law
During the 1990s, the balance of power between the three branches of government
clearly shifted in favor of the executive, resulting in “presidential hegemony.” The
autocratic style of government established under Néstor Kirchner has not changed
under Cristina Fernández. After she was elected president in October 2007, she began
to govern in tandem with her husband, in what the media dubbed a dual presidency,
“los K” or “the Clintons of the South.” The structural problems of divided
government are exacerbated by a winner take-all political culture among the parties
and the fact that political obstructionism rather than cooperation pays dividends. The
use of executive decree powers has marginalized the role of the Congress in
formulating, scrutinizing and passing legislation, while undermining trust between
the executive and the legislature. Néstor Kirchner used 236 necessity and urgency
decrees (NUDs), or five per month, as compared to Alfonsín’s 10 and Menem’s 276
(2.3 per month). Fernández was more discreet, using only 29 NUDs until 2011. At
the same time, the number of presidential vetoes dropped from 25 (during the former
presidency) to 16 (under Fernández). Despite the concentration of power in the
executive branch, the president remains constrained by provincial governors, the real
power nodes within the Argentine political system; by civic organizations and the
media as agents of “societal accountability”; and, last but not least, by a growing
opposition both inside and outside the Peronist party. Some patterns of institutional
manipulation continued under both Kirchner presidencies. Examples include the
reform of the Magistrates Council, the 2006 “superpowers” law that granted the
president vast discretionary authority over the budget, and the government’s assault
on the once-independent statistical agency, the National Institute of Statistics
(Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos, INDEC). A more positive example of
democratization, however, was Fernández’ July 2011 decree establishing open
primaries. In general, the Kirchners have respected the letter of the law while
violating its spirit. The legislature’s key weakness is its consent to the strength of the
executive branch. The Congress has few experienced leaders, virtually no
professional staff and little technical expertise, and its committee system and
oversight bodies are poorly developed. Few politicians have invested seriously in
legislative careers. The share of members re-elected to the Argentine National
Congress has been and remains the lowest in Latin America, with the exception of
Mexico and Costa Rica (where immediate re-election is prohibited).
Separation of
powers
5
Argentina’s judiciary is generally independent, but remains subject to strong
influence from political authorities and plagued by corruption. It is institutionally
differentiated, but partially restricted by insufficient functional capacity. These
problems are more severe at the provincial level. The degree of political manipulation
within Argentina’s provincial high courts is very high, as demonstrated by recent
research. Alignment with the faction of the ruling governor is a major factor in
Independent
judiciary
6 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 10
accounting for justices’ turnover not only in single-party provinces, as expected, but
even in multiparty provinces. Because provincial politics have proven to be a major
source of power for national politicians, governors would prefer to have a friendly
court in place during their administration. Sweeping judicial reforms played a
prominent role in Cristina Fernández’ inaugural address, in which she promised to
make judges pay taxes, restore the public’s faith in the judiciary and “reconstruct the
value of security in the face of some incomprehensible judicial rulings.” However,
the gap between expectations and a real rule of law remains wide. The two Kirchner
governments have over time been increasingly resistant to comply with court-ordered
obligations, as in the case of the payment of pensions, the democratization of trade
unions, various environmental questions, the freedom of expression, and the
separation of powers. However, the Supreme Court has gained in institutional
stability and political independence during the Kirchners’ terms.
The weakness of the rule of law is combined with a system of privileges that violate
the principle of equality. The judicial system lacks transparency, efficiency and
neutrality. Central problems in the country’s judicial system and penal practices
include poor prison conditions, including the mistreatment of some prisoners;
occasional arbitrary arrest and detention; prolonged pretrial detention; excessive use
of force by the police; and a general judicial inefficiency. Aside from changes in the
Supreme Court and the Magistrates Council, which is responsible for the appointment
and removal of judges, few of the promised reform projects have been realized. Public
confidence in Argentine jurisprudence remains low. According to Latinobarómetro
2010, only 34% of Argentines had confidence in the judicial system (as compared to
32% in Latin America as a whole).
Corruption continues to pervade public institutions. The country has strong anticorruption regulations and two administrative organizations that work outside the
auspices of the Justice Ministry, but this is offset by uneven enforcement and a weak
judiciary. Statistics from the Center for the Investigation and Prevention of Economic
Crime have shown that, over the last 25 years, corruption cases have taken an average
of 14 years to process. Leading anti-corruption activists have accused the
administration of stalling on its good governance agenda, particularly by failing to
ensure the effective functioning of administrative controls.
Political parties, legislators, the police and the judicial system are perceived as the
most corrupt institutions.
Abuse of office by elected officials usually goes unpunished. Nepotism in the
provinces, an eternal temptation for governors, is still endemic. The obstacles that
prevent the efficient prosecution of corruption are not moral or legal, but are rather a
set of informal practices that discourage, preclude or frustrate effective investigation.
Prosecution of
office abuse
5 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 11
Illegal campaign financing and money laundering are crimes that go unpunished in
Argentina.
Civil rights and liberties exist, are guaranteed, and comprise equality before the law,
equal access to justice and due process under the rule of law. However, since both
the police and the judiciary are politicized, corrupt, poorly paid and inefficient, legal
action taken to remedy violations of these civil rights and liberties is usually
inadequate. The excessive use of force by police and other security forces has been
reported as a recurring problem. The situation in jails is also problematic due to severe
overcrowding and the poor quality of basic services. In addition, torture continues to
be a serious issue in prison and detention centers. The Argentine military and police
are resistant to government enforcement of human rights, and national and provincial
governments have been unable to change the prevailing culture in the security forces,
with repeated failures to reform police forces known to be corrupt and complicit in
criminal activity.
Another issue of primary concern for Argentines is public security, especially in
Buenos Aires. According to Latinobarómetro 2011, growing public insecurity and
crime rates are problems of the first rank in Argentine perception, with 34% of the
citizenry identifying these issues as major concerns (compared to 37% in 2010; the
2011 Latin American average was 28%, up from 27% in 2010). Only 16 of 100
Argentinean citizens are convinced that democracy guarantees protection against
crime, the lowest such rate in Latin America. There are national and local ombudsmen
tasked with aiding citizens whose rights are violated by the state, but their role is de
facto very limited for low-income and other socially marginalized people.
Civil rights
7
4 | Stability of Democratic Institutions
Democratic institutions, including the administrative system and the judiciary, have
recovered step by step from the 2001 – 2002 crisis. However, their effective
functioning is not today sufficiently guaranteed, and their interrelationships are not
entirely smooth. Fernández’ presidency has been characterized by a significant
concentration of executive power at the expense of other democratic institutions and
the division of powers. Convinced that electoral majorities confer the right to govern
without participation by the opposition, she has not tolerated external oversight. The
highly fragmented opposition, lacking both negative and positive agenda controls,
has been left in a position in which it has little choice but to react. The real opposition
is located inside the Peronist party, although some of the dissident forces within this
movement have adapted themselves to the ruling coalition.
The system of formal and informal incentives contained within the country’s political
system ensures that obstruction of the government is more profitable for the
opposition than cooperation. On the other hand, this behavior did not exclude the
Performance of
democratic
institutions
6 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 12
majority of the opposition from approving certain strategic government decisions, as,
for instance, the nationalization of Repsol’s YPF oil and gas subsidiary and the
private pension fund system AFJP.
The electoral system has a similarly constraint-producing effect. The rebirth of
provincial power, linked to the weakening of the party system, has produced a
redistribution of political power with considerable consequences for governance. The
“localization” and decentralization of politics emerged without the parallel
development of a solid party system on the national level, and without the
institutional mechanisms that typically constitute a countervailing power to these
centrifugal tendencies. Instead, electoral laws were changed as a response to the
immediate needs of the prevailing political constellation.
The relevant democratic actors accept democratic institutions as legitimate, but do
not always support them. Notwithstanding the concentration of power and the PJ’s
electoral dominance, the core institutions of Argentine democracy remain
undisputed. Elections are clean (with a few exceptions), civil liberties are broadly
protected and potential veto powers are comparatively weak. The military,
responsible for six coups between 1930 and 1976, has withdrawn from politics. The
constitutional order has not been interrupted since Argentina’s return to democracy.
The threefold Front for Victory (FPV) victories in the general elections (2003, 2007
and 2011) and in midterm elections (2005) were the product of opposition weakness
rather than of incumbent abuses, as well as being derived from economic successes.
The ruling coalition’s loss of its majority in the 2009 midterm elections was not
repeated in 2011. It was therefore not a sign that a reinforced and more cohesive
opposition had emerged. The behavior of the opposition during the October 2011
election campaign and after its defeat was a political disaster, but was not the result
of extralegal practices on the part of the executive. The ruling coalition gained its
spectacular victory without making concessions to potential veto players either inside
or outside the Peronist movement.
Commitment to
democratic
institutions
8
5 | Political and Social Integration
The party system is fairly stable, socially rooted, moderately fragmented and
polarized. Volatility is also moderate. The traditional structures of Argentina’s party
system, characterized by competition between Peronism (PJ) and Radicalism (UCR),
were maintained during the Kirchner and Fernández presidencies, although the walls
between the two camps have become increasingly porous. The electoral system
favors the periphery at the expense of the urban centers, and Peronism and Radicalism
at the expense of third parties. The Argentine democracy, with its rigid two-party
nature, is therefore a cemetery for new parties. Peronists and Radicals have survived
thanks to their anchorages in the provinces, with Peronism having proved more
successful due to its high capacity to reinvent itself every decade. Néstor Kirchner
Party system
6 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 13
was the last Peronist able to unite the subdivisions of the party, and his loss leaves a
fragmented Peronist movement. The UCR has been fighting for survival since the
disaster of President de la Rúa in 2001, and remains in disarray. Opposition forces on
both the left and right remain divided. None of the opposition parties that emerged in
the wake of the UCR’s collapse possessed a national organization or a significant
activist base. Smaller parties occupy various positions on the political spectrum, but
are active only in certain provinces. Third parties have never established effective
party organizations, and tend to be overly dependent on the popularity of a single
leader (or small coterie of leaders).
Fernández’ overwhelming electoral victory in 2011 was a product of this opposition
weakness. She defeated the nearest challenger, Santa Fé Governor Hermes Binner of
the Socialist Party, by an unprecedented 37 points. Her Front for Victory (FPV)
coalition also regained control of both houses of Congress in concurrent legislative
election. However, enduring fragmentation among the Peronists has made it difficult
for Fernández to exercise partisan control.
The existing network of associations reflects most social interests and is to some
extent able to mediate between society and the political system. However, it is
relatively fragmented and dominated by a few strong interest groups, above all
business organizations and unions, producing a latent risk of pooling conflicts.
Established channels enabling communication between organized interest groups and
the executive were interrupted during the crisis of 2001 – 2002. Néstor Kirchner only
partially restored these relationships. Systematic negotiation and agreements with
both organized labor and domestic business were part of Kirchner’s greater goal of
economic development, due to the need to contain inflation, or more specifically
excessive wage increases, one of the main traditional drivers of Argentine inflation.
Wage agreements were paralleled by bilateral government-business pacts on
maximum prices in each sector. However, Kirchner’s strategy of promoting domestic
industry to foster growth changed the relationship between the state and the business
sector, rendering the government vulnerable to pressure from domestic business
interests.
Organized labor continues to play a strong role in Argentina. While market reforms
and deindustrialization have weakened the organized labor movement since the
1980s, recent years have shown that even the relatively diminished union sector
wields considerable mobilization power. This resurgence of trade unionism has been
related to the advent of a pro-union government and the strength of the labor market
in recent years. However, the rise of new social movements during the crisis as well
as the appearance of alternative trade unions increasingly threatens the hegemony of
the established trade unions. Additionally, the image of the trade unions as corrupt
organizations has by no means disappeared. Today, the unions no longer play a quasiuniversalistic role as agents of the working class; rather, they play a new role in the
neo-corporatist model, acting as a moderating force in the economy. Argentine trade
Interest groups
7 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 14
unionism now represents around half of the working class. Indeed, some union
demands may be at odds with the needs of the weakest and poorest sectors of the
lower class. Consequently, the mainstream Argentine unions today are agencies that
simultaneously foster social equity (by fighting for higher wages) and inequality.
After the 2011 elections, the relationship between the government and the trade
unions – particularly the CGT – worsened. The cash crunch has brought an open
conflict with the Peronist party machine. CGT Secretary-General Hugo Moyano
organized a 24-hour general strike on 20 November 2012. This strike was carried out
by members of the working class, grassroots social movements and left-wing parties
that have long been in opposition to Fernández, with protestors asserting that the
government’s left-wing rhetoric has not been matched by what they considered to be
right-wing policies. On this occasion, the government responded by saying that the
event was blackmail, not a strike. However, the strike showed that Moyano still has
the power to bring the country to a standstill.
Approval levels for democratic norms and procedures are fairly high. According to
Latinobarómetro 2011, support for democracy is strong and has even increased in
recent years, rising from 60% in 2008 to 66% in 2010, and to 70% in 2011. However,
it has not regained the high mark of 81%seen in 2006. About 73% of respondents
declared they would not support a military government under any conditions. The
percentage of people convinced that the country is governed to the benefit of citizens
rather than of powerful corporations has increased substantially from 33% (2010) to
45% (2011). One of the most deplorable shortcomings is the fight against corruption,
which is identified as the country’s most urgent problem by 61% of respondents.
Eighty percent (as compared to 73% in 2010) were convinced that democracy cannot
exist without a legislative body (as compared to a Latin American average of 59%).
About 74% (the highest such figure in Latin America) of Argentines surveyed
expressed the belief that democracy cannot exist without political parties. However,
only 66% believed in 2011 that the most important aspect of being a citizen was to
vote (as compared to 73% in 2010, and 75% in 2009), and 48% of survey respondents
said they mistrusted the government (compared to 40% in Latin America as a whole).
In general, the gap between acceptance of democratic institutions and judgments as
to their correct functioning has narrowed moderately, at least until the 2011 elections.
Approval of
democracy
9
Since the return to democracy in 1983, civil society has been broadly organized and
highly differentiated. Self-organization and the construction of social capital have
progressively advanced. While new social actors quickly learned to cooperate on the
local level, where more than a third of such groups benefited from horizontal social
networks, their relationships with parties, parliament and the government was marked
by distance and confrontation until the general elections of 2003. The renewed
dynamism of civil society as a provider of services following the retreat of the state
helps to explain why Argentine society was able to resist the social and economic
collapse in 2001 – 2002 without a more violent social outburst. Civil society
Social capital
7 
BTI 2014 | Argentina 15
organizations had a remarkable impact during the crisis years due to their voluntary
human resource mobilization, but this effect decreased as the economy recovered,
and as social programs targeting those most affected were ultimately implemented.
Mutual confidence is still underdeveloped today, with only 28% of Argentines
agreeing that one can trust the majority of persons. Fundamental social norms are
also poorly developed; in 2012, only 28% of survey respondents believed that citizens
acted to satisfy the law’s requirements, although 41% agreed that citizens knew its
obligations and duties. About 62% were convinced that the rich satisfied the law to
only a minor degree; some authors even regard Argentina as “an anomic society.”
Societal polarization increased during the period under review.