The state´s monopoly on the use of force in principle prevails throughout the country
and is not seriously disputed by functional organizations such as guerrillas or
paramilitaries. However, organized crime related to drug trafficking has grown
significantly over the last decade, as Argentina not only became the second-largest
cocaine market in Latin America after Brazil, but also a transit point for drugs to West
Africa and Europe. Money-laundering activities related to drug money have become
a growing concern. Increasing levels of violent crime and the emergence of private
security services today threaten to erode or even overwhelm the state´s monopoly on
the use of force in urban centers.
In addition, federalism and so-called new security challenges sometimes restrict the
state’s monopoly on the use of force. In the poorer provinces, shortages in funding
and personnel have limited the state’s ability to act effectively, or have even
undermined it by opening security personnel to the temptations of corruption.
According to the 2013 Latinobarómetro poll, 35% of Argentines are convinced that
crime is the most important problem (average in Latin America: 24%). There are
several factors behind the rise of criminality and public insecurity. One is the ongoing
economic deterioration, characterized by rising inflation and unemployment. A
second factor is that Argentina is increasingly becoming a transit corridor for illegal
drugs passing from the Andean producer countries to Argentine ports. Drug-related
violence is therefore on the increase in the northern border states, as well as in areas
of high drug use, such as Buenos Aires. In the port city Rosario, the head of the city’s
police force and its anti-drug czar were arrested over their links with traffickers. In
2013, the most extended police strike since 1989 took place, which included 21
provinces. In addition, the recent corrosive internal conflicts within the intelligence
services and the growing tension between the government and the Intelligence
Secretary should be considered important challenges to the state’s monopoly on the
use of force.
Monopoly on the
use of force
8 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 6
The large majority of the population accepts the nation-state as legitimate. All
individuals and group members have the right to acquire citizenship without
discrimination. No relevant group in society challenges the definition of citizenship
or the validity of the state’s constitution. A potential source of friction remains the
civil rights of indigenous people, including the Mapuche in the south and the Tobas
and Kolas in the north, who together represent between 3% and 5% of the total
population. Some 70 % of the country’s rural indigenous communities lack title to
their lands. Though land was returned to several communities under Néstor Kirchner,
most land disputes remain today unresolved. Forced evictions have occurred, such as
in Chaco Province. Indigenous communities have been prevented from exercising
their right to free, prior and informed consent to projects involving the exploitation
of national resources on indigenous land, such as the Qom community in Formosa.
To date, however, while certainly a civil rights issue, this has not led to a challenge
of state identity.
State identity
10
The constitution guarantees freedom of religion. Church and state are separated, and
the political process is secularized. However, the Catholic Church is subsidized by
the state and has authority in important issues. The political influence of the church
has diminished further under Kirchner and Fernández. Néstor Kirchner and the
Catholic Church clashed on issues including abortion, sexual education, human rights
violations and poverty. Cristina Fernández’s relationship with the Catholic Church
has been strained due her outspoken support for same-sex marriage and the perceived
leftism of her government’s agenda. In November 2012, the Episcopal Conference
distributed a document complaining about restrictions on free expression and
“excessive caudillism,” or a centralization of personal power. The document
provoked a response by Vice-President Amado Boudou to the effect that nobody
would be interested in such a complaint. The Argentine Episcopal Conference
continues to be very critical in its documents concerning government policies.
No interference of
religious dogmas
10
The state’s fundamental infrastructure extends to the entire territory of the country,
but operates somewhat deficiently. The political administrative network and political
parties administer public funds, but the distribution follows particularistic,
clientelistic and nontransparent criteria. The weakness of the state and its institutions
is especially apparent in its inability to prevent rampant tax evasion, which has been
one of the population’s long-term responses to the corralito (the freezing of bank
accounts in 2001). The northern provinces are still burdened with longstanding
economic difficulties. These nine provinces are home to about 20% of the population.
Children in this region starve from malnutrition, in a country that exports foodstuffs.
The government’s cut in subsidies affected the poor provinces particularly hard.
There are no federal policies promoting development in depressed regions, and there
are very few employment opportunities outside the public sector. The state’s
weakness in supplying basic services has deepened, primarily in the provinces.
Basic
administration
8 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 7
2 | Political Participation
General elections are mostly free and fair, and are accepted as the appropriate means
of filling leadership positions. Universal suffrage and the right to campaign for office
exist. The electoral juridical body (Cámara Nacional Electoral) is integral part of the
judiciary. It is not a separate body as in other Latin American countries, but is
nominally independent in its decisions. Nevertheless, the distribution of public funds
is asymmetric in favor of the ruling party coalition. There is also a certain media bias
due to the use of national TV by the government. However, due to a strong and
independent private media sector (with media titles such as Clarín and La Nación in
sharp opposition to the government) this bias is overall somewhat limited.
With some notorious exceptions at the provincial level, governments respect the rules
underlying open and competitive elections. Some isolated attempts to manipulate
elections have been investigated and sanctioned, at least rhetorically. After the
governing coalition’s electoral defeat in the 2009 mid-term parliamentary elections,
President Fernández promoted a political reform with substantial procedural changes
that in sum served to strengthen her own power resources and limit her competitors’
flexibility of action. The same package lowered the voting age from 18 to 16 years,
a shift confirmed by Congress in October 2012. In July 2011, Fernández signed a
decree creating open, simultaneous and obligatory primaries, which were held for the
first time in August 2011.
Free and fair
elections
9
Democratically elected political representatives generally have the power to govern.
Nevertheless, in Argentina’s under-institutionalized political system, individual
power groups can at times create their own separate domains or enact special-interest
policies. The success of these groups varies, however, depending on political cycles,
and the phenomenon does not harm the democratic political process as such. Since
the beginning of Fernández’s second term, the government has had sufficient
authority to govern, but the strongest labor organization, the Confederación General
de Trabajo (CGT), has gained increasing power as a veto actor. Its political weight
under the leadership of Secretary-General Hugo Moyano, the president of the
powerful transporters’ union, has been reflected in episodes of clear political
defiance, such as the general strikes held in November 2012 and April 2014.
Relations between the government and Argentina’s entrepreneurs have improved
with the recovery of the economy, but continue to oscillate between mutual
accommodation and a careful distance. The Kirchners’ strategy of growth through
the support of domestic industry has changed the relationship between state and
business, making the government at times vulnerable to pressures from domestic
business interests. In October 2014, the Argentine Industrial Union (UIA), the
manufacturers’ association, very strongly criticized the government’s economic
Effective power to
govern
8 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 8
model. Another challenge for the government is the financial sector, which pressed
the government to devalue the currency, which happened in April 2014.
The third significant corporation, the military, is no longer a veto power in political
affairs; its role has been reduced substantially since the beginning of the Menem
administration and again since the beginning of Néstor Kirchner’s government.
The rights of citizens to establish political and civic organizations and to assemble
freely are generally respected. Civic organizations such as unions, business
organizations and NGOs play a significant role in politics and society and are
generally free from legal restrictions and political pressure from the state. Union
influence, strongly undermined during the Menem era by neoliberal reforms,
corruption scandals and internal divisions, gained negotiating power with the
economic recovery (and the more flexible governing style under Cristina Fernández).
Beyond the established forms of interest group articulation, there has been an
emergence of basic organizations, self-help groups and other forms of selfarticulation and protest. Watchdog organizations monitor and try to influence
government policy on a variety of issues. However, their influence on the legislative
process is modest in part because of the absence of a legislative agenda and of
information regarding committee meetings. With a few exceptions, the government
has reacted with flexibility, incorporating some movements or responding to their
demands with jobs and/or material benefits. During its second term, the government’s
style was increasingly rigid and the trade unions divided.
Association /
assembly rights
10
Freedom of information and the freedom of speech are guaranteed by law and mostly
respected in practice, though some significant shortcomings persist. Argentina is one
of South America’s leading media markets, with lively journalism. However,
effective access and monopoly controls are absent, particularly in television, which
is dominated by a few companies. Public broadcasting has not played a major role in
the development of radio and TV. The non-transparent practices of government
advertising contracts remain a problem at the federal level and in some provinces.
According to Reporters Without Borders, journalists in some provinces risk being
harassed by the police and courts. Some journalists working for the independent
media have received threats.
The governments’ attempts to influence the media have grown since the Menem
presidency. During Cristina Fernández’s presidency, this hostility extended also to El
Clarín, which in previous years had been considered a near-official organ of the
government. Kirchner and Fernández both characterized critical media outlets and
journalists as political opponents. A bill to regulate the broadcast media, approved by
Congress in October 2009 and confirmed by the Supreme Court in 2013, aims to
promote the diversity of views in media. In October 2010, commissions of the
Chamber of Deputies approved draft legislation presented by President Fernández to
regulate the company that produces and distributes paper used for newsprint in
Freedom of
expression
8 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 9
Argentina. In recent years, the media war sparked by the government’s effort to
dismantle the Clarín Group intensified.
The state does not hinder free access to the Internet. According to the 2010
Latinobarómetro, 26% of Argentines - the highest rate in Latin America – claim they
obtain information about political issues from the Internet. Freedom of cultural
expression and academic freedom are generally unrestricted. Until now, no bill to
ensure public access to information held by state bodies has been approved by
Congress.
3 | Rule of Law
Since the 1990s, the balance of power between the three branches of government has
clearly shifted in favor of the executive, resulting in a “presidential hegemony”
continuing until the presidency of Cristina Fernández. The structural problems of
divided government are exacerbated by a winner take-all political culture among the
parties and the fact that political obstructionism rather than cooperation pays
dividends. The use of executive decree powers has marginalized the role of Congress
in formulating, scrutinizing and passing legislation, while undermining trust between
the executive and the legislature. The legislature’s key weaknesses are its largely
nonprofessional staff and its little technical expertise. In addition, its committee
system and oversight bodies are poorly developed. Few politicians have invested
seriously in legislative careers. Under both presidencies, the government’s influence
in parliament was highly visible in the legislation process, in the nomination of judges
for the Supreme Court of Justice and in decisions about commission memberships
within Congress. The recent reforms in the judicial system have the objective of
reducing the independence of the third power.
Some patterns of institutional manipulation continued under both Kirchner
presidencies. Examples include the Magistrate Council, the still-valid 2006
“superpowers” law that grant the president vast discretionary authority over the
budget, and the government’s assault on the once-independent statistical agency, the
National Institute of Statistics (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos, INDEC).
The control of the fiscal resources by the executive reinforces the dependency of
provincial governors on the president. However, despite the concentration of power
in the executive branch, the president remains constrained by provincial governors
(the real power nodes within the Argentine political system), by civic organizations
and the mass media as agents of “social accountability” and, last but not least, by a
growing opposition both inside and outside the Peronist party.
Separation of
powers
5 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 10
Argentina’s judiciary is institutionally differentiated and generally independent, but
remains subject to strong influence from political authorities and plagued by
corruption as well as insufficient functional capacity and efficiency. These problems
are more severe at the provincial level where governors prefer to have a friendly court
in place during their administration. The Kirchner governments have over time been
increasingly resistant to comply with court-ordered obligations, as in the case of
payment of pensions, the democratization of trade unions, various environment
questions, the freedom of expression, and the separation of powers. However, the
Supreme Court has gained in institutional stability and political independence during
the Kirchners’ terms.
In April 2013, Congress approved three government reforms to revise Argentina’s
justice system. One law aimed at limiting individuals’ ability to request injunctions
against government acts. A second one reformed the composition and selection of the
Magistrates Council, which selects judges and decides whether to open proceedings
for their removal, thereby granting the ruling party an automatic majority. A central
point of contention was the popular election of the representatives who make up the
Magistrates Council (judges, lawyers and academics), who, until now, were elected
by peers. In June, the Supreme Court declared some of these norms unconstitutional.
Opponents defended the Court’s decision as positive and emphasized that, despite its
rhetoric on democratizing justice, the government did not speed up reforms, such as
facilitating access to justice for the poor or reducing the costs and formalities of
litigation, among other simple solutions.
The focus of a third reform package was the penal code. The bill would reduce
penalties for severe crimes, such as human trafficking and drug trafficking, from 10
to 8 years, whereas eight out of 10 Argentines advocate more severe penalties. The
reforms would also result in the inclusion of crimes against humanity, torture “by
omission,” rape within marriage, and environmental crimes in the Argentine criminal
code. Finally, the project also permits the deportation of foreign criminals. These
reform recommendations, overseen by supreme court judge Raúl Zaffaroni, have
been criticized by opposition politicians for being overly lenient on criminals, as they
would see life sentences and punishment for recidivism eliminated.
During the second term of Cristina Fernández, there was a deepening of the
politicization of the judicial branch, which is actually divided into two groups,
Justicia Legítima (Legitimate Justice) from the government faction, and the rest, who
call themselves “independent.” The suspicious death of prosecutor Alberto Nisman
increased tensions within the judiciary and between judicial sectors and the
government.
Independent
judiciary
6
BTI 2016 | Argentina 11
Corruption continues to pervade public institutions. Argentina has signed the AntiCorruption Conventions of both the Organization of American States (OAS) and the
OECD. It has also signed and ratified the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and actively participates in the Mechanism for Follow-Up on the
Implementation of the Inter-American Convention against Corruption. The country
has strong anti-corruption regulation and two administrative organizations that work
outside the orbit of the Justice Ministry, but this is offset by uneven enforcement and
a weak judiciary. Political parties, legislators, the police and the judicial system are
perceived as the most corrupt institutions.
Abuse of office by elected officials usually goes unpunished. Nepotism in the
provinces, an eternal temptation of the governors, is still endemic. The obstacles that
prevent the efficient prosecution of corruption are not moral or legal, but are rather a
set of informal practices that discourage, preclude or frustrate effective investigation.
Illegal campaign financing and money laundering are crimes that go unpunished in
Argentina. Nevertheless, two of the most spectacular cases of presumed corruption
in the period under review are still under investigation: the case of Vice-President
Amado Boudou, accused of helping a company to exit bankruptcy in 2010, when
Boudou was minister of the economy; and the linkage between some hotels of the
Kirchners’ in Patagonia and a businessman under suspicion of money laundering,
known as the main beneficiary of public works in Patagonia.
Finally, prosecutor Alberto Nisman accused President Fernández and other
government officials of impeding investigations in the involvement of Iranians in the
1994 bombing of the AMIA Jewish association headquarters in Buenos Aires.
According to Nisman’s 300-page document, the government wished to exonerate
leading Iranian officials suspected of involvement in order to “establish trade
relations to mitigate Argentina’s severe energy crisis, through an exchange of oil for
grains.” Since the unexpected death of Nisman on 19 January 2015, one day prior to
his scheduled appearance before Congress, investigations have virtually stalled.
Prosecution of
office abuse
5
Civil rights and liberties exist, are guaranteed, and comprise equality before the law,
equal access to justice and due process under rule of law. However, since both the
police and the judiciary are politicized, corrupt, poorly paid and inefficient, legal
action taken to remedy violations of these civil rights and liberties is usually
inadequate. The excessive use of force by police and other security forces has been
reported as a recurrent problem. The situation in jails is also problematic due to severe
overcrowding and the poor quality of basic services. In addition, torture continues to
be a serious issue in prison and detention centers. The Argentine military and the
police are resistant to government enforcement of human rights, and national and
provincial governments have been unable to change the prevailing culture in the
security forces, with repeated failures to reform police forces known to be corrupt
and complicit in criminal activity
Civil rights
7 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 12
Another issue of primary concern for Argentines is public security, especially in
Buenos Aires. Much of the increase in the level of violent crime as well as the marked
increase in the perception of crime as a problem has been fueled by a growth in illegal
drug use and by the complicity of high-ranking judicial and law enforcement
authorities in the drug trade. Balancing public demands for security with the
commitment to civil and human rights continues to be a challenge. The government
has no clear policy for addressing this problem, leaving the task mainly to NGOs.
There are national and local ombudsmen tasked with aiding citizens whose rights are
violated by the state, but their role is de facto very limited for low-income and other
socially marginalized people.
There is growing anti-Semitism and xenophobia against immigrants from the Andean
countries and Asia. In many cases, the polarization between Kirchnerists and AntiKirchnerists defines the access to public employment. Although the participation of
women in politics, guaranteed by the “cupo femenino” (women’s quota), is the
highest in Latin America, salaries and conditions of work in the private sector are
lower than those of men, and the number of women at the executive level is
insufficient.
4 | Stability of Democratic Institutions
Democratic institutions, including the administrative system and the judiciary, have
recovered step by step from the 2001-2002 crisis. However, their effective
functioning today is not sufficiently guaranteed, and their interrelationships are not
entirely smooth. Both Kirchners’ presidencies have been characterized by a
significant concentration of executive power at the expense of other democratic
institutions and the division of powers. Convinced that electoral majorities confer the
right to govern without participation by the opposition, they have not tolerated
external oversight. The loyal, but, since the October 2013 mid-term elections, very
small PJ majority in both chambers gave President Fernández the necessary backing.
The PJ’s success as a legislative majority party stems from its functioning as an
effective cartel. The majority party leadership uses its majority status to dominate the
legislative process, excluding legislation that it believes may pass despite their
objection to it (negative agenda control).
The system of formal and informal incentives contained within the country’s political
system ensures that obstruction of the government is more profitable for the
opposition than cooperation. On the other hand, this behavior did not exclude the
majority of the opposition from approving certain strategic government decisions, as,
for instance, the nationalization of Repsol’s YPF oil and gas subsidiary and the
private pension fund system AFIP. The electoral system has a similar constraintproducing effect. The rebirth of provincial power, linked with the weakening of the
party system, has produced a redistribution of political power, with considerable
Performance of
democratic
institutions
6 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 13
consequences for governance. The “localization” and decentralization of politics
emerged without the parallel development of a solid party system at the national level,
and without institutional mechanisms that typically constitute a countervailing power
to these centrifugal tendencies. Instead, electoral laws were changed as a response to
the immediate needs of the prevailing political constellation.
All relevant actors in politics and society accept democratic institutions as legitimate,
but do not always actively support them. Notwithstanding the concentration of power
and the PJ’s electoral dominance, the core institutions of Argentine democracy
remain undisputed. Elections are clean (with a few exceptions) and civil liberties are
broadly protected, though the judiciary is sometimes considered more as an obstacle
to government than a necessary element of checks and balances. Potential veto
powers are comparatively weak. The military, responsible for six coups between
1930 and 1976, has withdrawn from politics. The constitutional order has not been
interrupted since Argentina’s return to democracy. The three victories of the Front
for Victory (FPV) in the general elections (2003, 2007, and 2011) and in mid-term
elections (2005) were the product of opposition weakness rather than of incumbent
abuses, as well as deriving from economic successes.
Commitment to
democratic
institutions
8
5 | Political and Social Integration
The party system is more or less stable due to the dominant role of the Peronist party.
It is in parts socially rooted, and moderately fragmented and polarized. Volatility is
also moderate. The traditional structures of Argentina’s party system, characterized
by competition between Peronism (PJ) and Radicalism (UCR), were maintained
during the Kirchner and Fernández presidencies, although the walls between the two
camps have become increasingly porous. The electoral system favors the periphery
at the expense of the urban centers, and Peronism and Radicalism at the expense of
third parties. The Argentine democracy, with its rigid two-party nature, is therefore a
cemetery for new parties.
Peronists and Radicals have survived thanks to their anchorages in the provinces,
with Peronism having proved more successful due to its high capacity to reinvent
itself every decade. Néstor Kirchner was the last Peronist able to unite the
subdivisions of the party, and his loss leaves a fragmented Peronist movement.
However, the electoral cost of this fragmentation is limited by the phenomenon of
listas colectoras (fusion candidacies), in which multiple mayoral and governmental
candidates support - and share a ballot with – the same presidential candidate. The
UCR has been fighting for survival since the disaster of President de la Rúa in 2001,
and remains in disarray. Opposition forces on both the left and right remain divided.
None of the opposition parties that emerged in the wake of the UCR’s collapse have
possessed a national organization or a significant activist base.
Party system
6 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 14
Smaller parties, such as the center-right Propuesta Republicana (PRO) and the more
left-leaning Afirmación para una República Igualitaria (ARI), occupy various
positions on the political spectrum, but are active only in certain provinces. Third
parties have never established effective party organizations, and tend to be overly
dependent on the popularity of a single leader (or small coterie of leaders). Since
2013, there has been a realignment in the party system. New alliances have formed
at the provincial level, while coalitions on the national level are still very volatile and
not definitively defined. The competition is between candidates, not between parties
as stable, long-term organizations.
The existent network of associations reflects most social interests and is to some
extent able to mediate between society and the political system. However, it is
relatively fragmented and dominated by a few strong interests groups, above all
business organizations and unions, producing a latent risk of pooling conflicts. After
the 2011 elections, the relationship between the government and trade unions –
particularly the CGT – worsened. The cash crunch has resulted in open conflict with
the Peronist party machine. A three-week teachers’ strike took place at the beginning
of 2013, followed by a second 24-hour general strike in April 2014, organized by the
trade union of transport. The deteriorated fiscal situation has prevented the
government from the satisfactory resolution of other strikes, for instance by public
employees in the provinces and two general strikes in August – one by the
government-friendly General Confederation of Labor (CGT), the other by the
opposition Central of Argentine Workers (CTA) under the leadership of Hugo
Moyano. One consequence of this is that the unions have threatened the government
with new protests. Starting in the 2015 election year, strikes were seen by the
government as a political demonstration of support for the political enemy, rather
than a genuine protest over wages.
The relationship with employers has worsened during the second term of Fernández,
due to restrictive import measures and the commercial accords with China concluded
in 2014, which have worried the industrial sector. The agrarian sector has resisted the
government’s tax policy in the midst of the fall of prices for its export products. Civil
society has an important tradition of civic associations at the federal and provincial
levels, which mobilize around public policies and sectoral and communitarian
organizations. Many sectoral organizations were co-opted during the presidencies of
the Kirchners. There are also a lot of informal social movements with a critical
orientation that are capable of mobilizing crowds.
Interest groups
7 
BTI 2016 | Argentina 15
Approval levels for democratic norms and procedures continues to be high.
According to the 2013 Latinobarómetro, support for democracy is strong and has
increased in recent years, rising from 60% in 2008 to 73% in 2013. In general,
citizens’ approval is still one of the strengths of democratic consolidation in
Argentina. Some 83% see democracy as the best governing system; 51% are very
satisfied with democracy and 73% believe that democracy without parties or congress
cannot exist (2010: 73%). The government approval rate was 43% in 2013 compared
to 73% in 2006, 34% in 2008, and an average in Latin America of 49% in 2013. Only
30% are interested in politics and only 5.1% are willing to protest for higher wages
and better working conditions, while 5.9% are willing to protest for improvements in
health care and education.
Political protests target the political class as a whole, but do not tend to call into
question the constitutional framework. Mistrust toward democratic institutions, their
ability to be representative and their performance has not disappeared. In general,
there is a wide gap between acceptance of democratic institutions and judgments
about their functioning. In 2013, 51% declared that the Argentine democracy has
major problems and only 34% are convinced that the government can solve these
problems within the next five years. About 64% stated that the government can solve
the problem of crime and corruption, 69% the problem of poverty.
Approval of
democracy
9
Civil society organizations had a remarkable impact during and after the 2001-2002
crisis due to their voluntary human resource mobilization, but this effect decreased
as the economy recovered and social programs targeting those most affected were
ultimately implemented. Nevertheless, there are still a large number of associations,
such as basic organizations, self-help groups and other forms of self-articulation and
protest. The picture concerning trust is more contradictory. In regional comparisons,
Argentina has long been considered a country with a high level of interpersonal trust
(though not reaching the levels of the Nordic countries). For example, in the 2011
Latinobarómetro, 28% of respondents answered that one can trust in the majority of
people. In recent times, however, trust seems to have eroded. The June 2014
Observatorio de Capital Social survey indicates that only 10% think that one can trust
other people (down from 19% in September 2013). Conversely, trust is high only
with respect to family and friends, and, to some extent, neighbors. In addition, while
50% responded that laws should be obeyed, about 85% hold that Argentines do not
adhere to the law, or only do so to a lesser extent. Nevertheless, some qualitative
(though not representative) studies indicate that there is indeed a considerable level
of trust in local communities. In addition, Argentines have recently demonstrated a
considerable ability to participate in collaborative consumption, showing at least that
distrust in others may be not as generalized as assumed.