1 | Stateness
Question
Score
The state´s monopoly on the use of force in principle prevails throughout the country
and is not seriously disputed by functional organizations such as guerrillas or
paramilitaries. However, organized crime related to drug-trafficking has grown
significantly over the last decade, as Argentina not only became the second-largest
cocaine market in Latin America behind Brazil, but also a transit point for drugs to
west Africa and Europe. A 2015 report on the drug trade by an Argentine NGO
revealed that Argentina’s capital city, Buenos Aires, was home to at least 10 cocaine
laboratories run by Peruvian criminal networks. Most affected by drug trade are the
northern and central regions of the country. The murder rate in Rosario, a center of
the drug trade, was five times the national average in 2014. Money-laundering
activities related to drug money have become a growing concern and the emergence
of private security services today threaten to erode or even overwhelm the state´s
monopoly on the use of force in urban centers. In the poorer provinces, shortages in
funding and personnel have limited the state’s ability to act effectively, or even
undermined it by opening security personnel to the temptations of corruption.
According to Latinobarómetro 2015, 71% of Argentine respondents stated that they
live in an increasingly insecure country.
Monopoly on the
use of force
8
The large majority of the population accepts the nation-state as legitimate. All
individuals and group members have the right to acquire citizenship without
discrimination. No relevant group in society challenges the definition of citizenship
or the validity of the state’s constitution. A potential source of friction remains the
civil rights of indigenous people, including the Mapuche in the south and the Tobas
and Kolas in the north, who together represent between 3% and 5% of the total
population. They are largely neglected by the government and suffer
disproportionately from illness and extreme poverty. 70% of the country’s rural
indigenous communities lack title to their lands. Though land was returned to several
communities under Néstor Kirchner, most land disputes remain today unresolved.
Only 11 of Argentina’s 23 provinces have constitutions recognizing the rights of
State identity
10
BTI 2018 | Argentina 7
indigenous people. Public awareness of the neglected rights of indigenous people is
very limited. Only 3% of citizens are convinced that indigenous people suffer most
from discrimination within the country.
The constitution guarantees freedom of religion. According to Latinobarómetro 2015,
60% of citizens are convinced that the state guarantees all confessions (2011: 44%).
Church and state are separated, and the political process is secularized. However, the
Catholic Church is subsidized by the state and has authority in important issues. The
political influence of the church has diminished further under Kirchner and
Fernández. Néstor Kirchner and the Catholic Church clashed on issues including
abortion, sexual education, human rights violations and poverty. Cristina Fernández’s
relationship with the Catholic Church has been strained due to her outspoken support
for same-sex marriage and the perceived leftism of her government’s agenda. General
expectations that the appointment of Cardinal Bergoglio as pope would influence
domestic policy were disappointed. The Argentine Episcopal Conference continues
to be very critical in its documents concerning government politics. Bergoglio’s
relation with Macri remains aloof.
No interference of
religious dogmas
10
The state’s fundamental infrastructure extends to the entire territory of the country,
but operates somewhat deficiently. State administrative and political parties
administer public funds, but the distribution followed particularistic, clientelistic and
nontransparent criteria during the Kirchner governments. There were no federal
policies promoting development in depressed regions, and there were very few
employment opportunities outside the public sector. One of President Macri’s first
measures was “Plan Belgrano,” an ambitious holistic development project to
transform the north. The plan is that the project will be rolled out in 10 poorer
provinces in the north of the country. It will have a budget of $16 billion over 10
years to boost social development, economic production and physical infrastructure.
The project aims to integrate the northern provinces productively into the center of
Argentina, the country’s ports and neighboring countries. The main objective of Plan
Belgrano is to resolve regional asymmetries, modernizing infrastructure and
improving logistics.
Basic
administration
8
2 | Political Participation
General elections are mostly free and fair, and are accepted in principle as the
legitimate means of filling leadership positions. Universal suffrage and the right to
campaign for office exist. The electoral juridical body (Cámara Nacional Electoral)
is integral part of the judiciary. It is not a separate body as in other Latin American
countries, but is nominally independent in its decisions. In a recent survey, 46% of
Argentine respondents stated that the Electoral Council does a good or very good job,
while 72% believe that participation in elections improves things. Turnout for the
2015 national elections was 82%.
Free and fair
elections
9
BTI 2018 | Argentina 8
The 2015 elections can be considered as free and fair. Media access was free and fair
for all candidates and parties. Though a recent exception involved the Tucumán
gubernatorial election in August 2015 in which some ballot boxes were burned and
there were accusations of vote-buying. Peaceful demonstrations against the
Kirchnerist candidate, Juan Manzur, who had been declared winner, were violently
ended by the police. In September 2015, the provincial Supreme Court ruled the
election valid, a decision confirmed in 2017 by the national Supreme Court.
Democratically elected political representatives generally have the power to govern,
but in Argentina’s under-institutionalized political system, individual power groups
can create their own separate domains or enact special-interest policies, albeit with
changing fortunes due to political cycles. There are four corporate actors that have
historically held a veto power: trade unions, big business, the financial sector and the
military. Once the most powerful veto power, since the early 1990s, the military no
longer has a veto power in political affairs. The military’s role has been reduced
substantially since the beginning of the Menem administration and again during the
two Kirchner governments.
During Fernández’s second term, the strongest labor organization, Confederación
General de Trabajo (CGT), strengthened its veto power. Relations between the
Kirchner government and Argentina’s entrepreneurs have improved with the
recovery of the economy (2003-2012), but continued to oscillate between mutual
accommodation and a careful distance. With Macri’s implementation of a more open
and liberal development model, relations with business improved. However, relations
with the trade unions were more complicated due to the high inflation rate and job
losses. Macri’s aim to prevent an alliance between the three competing trade union
organizations succeeded only for a few months. The cohesion and power of the trade
unions increased in the second half of 2016. Perceiving the growing resistance to his
economic policies, Macri has attempted to mend fences with the trade unions. He has
been urged to make some concessions (e.g. wage increases) and abandon parts of his
ambitious reform program. The financial sector (a third potential veto-group) pressed
the government to devalue the currency in 2014 and, together with the agrarian sector,
was the real winner of Macri’s neoliberal reforms. An August 2016 arrangement
opened access to the international capital market.
Effective power to govern was also somewhat limited by the enduring tensions
between the government and the Intelligence Services in the context of the suspicious
death of prosecutor Alberto Nisman in January 2015. Nisman had accused President
Fernández of a clandestine deal with Iran to cover up Iranian complicity in the 1994
bombing of the Jewish AMIA center in Buenos Aires.
Effective power to
govern
8
BTI 2018 | Argentina 9
Citizens are free to establish political and civic organizations and assemble freely.
These rights are generally respected. Civil society organizations are robust and play
a significant role in society, although some periodically fall victim to Argentina’s
endemic corruption. Trade union influence, strongly undermined during the Menem
era by neoliberal reforms, corruption scandals and internal divisions, gained
negotiating power with the economic recovery and the more flexible governing style
under Cristina Fernández. Beyond the established forms of interest group articulation,
there has been an emergence of basic organizations, self-help groups and other forms
of self-articulation and protest. NGOs monitor and influence government policy on a
variety of issues. They are generally free from legal restrictions and political pressure
from the state. An exception was the reaction of the province government to civil
protests against alleged voter fraud in Tucumán Province’s gubernatorial election in
August 2015. The police violently dispersed thousands of protesting people.
Association /
assembly rights
10
Freedom of information and the freedom of speech are guaranteed by law, but
occasionally subject to interference or government restrictions. A bill to regulate the
broadcast media, approved by Congress in October 2009, aimed to promote a
diversity of views by limiting the ability of corporations to own large portions of the
radio frequency spectrum. The bill was upheld by Argentina’s Supreme Court in
2013. The state does not hinder free access to the internet, which is widely used in
Argentina. The country is the third largest mobile market in Latin America and a
unique subscriber basis covers 90% of the population, higher than Europe (85%), the
United States (80%) and the regional average (68%).
One of the first measures of the Macri government was a decree that effectively
overturned the 2009 media law designed to discourage monopolies and strengthen
the government’s media. Federal judges have put a block on this decree and the
decision seems set to provoke another long legal battle. On January 12, 2016, around
20 000 Argentines took to the streets of Buenos Aires to protest the media law reform
in what proved to be one of the biggest demonstrations against the new government.
In September 2016, Congress passed an access to information law after a legislative
debate that had lasted about 12 years.
Freedom of
expression
9
3 | Rule of Law
Since the 1990s, the balance of power between the three branches of government
clearly shifted in favor of the executive, resulting in a “presidential hegemony”
continuing until the presidencies of Néstor Kirchner and his wife Cristina Fernández
(2003-2015). The use of executive decree powers has marginalized the role of the
Congress in formulating, scrutinizing and passing legislation, while undermining
trust between the executive and the legislature. The hope that this practice would end
following the formation of Macri’s coalition government was disappointed within a
few days of Macri’s victory. Mindful of his lack of a majority in Congress and eager
Separation of
powers
7
BTI 2018 | Argentina 10
to catch the opposition off guard with parliament in recess until March 2016, Macri
implemented many of his first reforms by decree. The most controversial of these
decrees related to judicial appointments and the reversal of one of the previous
government’s landmark pieces of legislation, the 2009 Media Law. While the two
new magistrates appointed to the court were widely respected and have cross-party
appeal, the manner of their appointment irritated even some of Macri’s own
supporters. Federal judges blocked Macri’s media law decree and the decision seems
to have provoked another long legal battle. Since Macri’s defeat in the two mentioned
cases, he has behaved more cautiously, concentrated on building bridges with some
parts of the opposition, maintained the disunion of the three Peronist factions in
Congress and shown more respect for the balance of power. There are also signs that
the judiciary has gained more autonomy.
Argentina’s judiciary is generally independent, but remains subject to influence from
political authorities. Though the extent of political influence varies depending on the
government in power. The populist Peronist governments usually exerted stronger
influence, while non-Peronists have tended to be more respectful of the judicial
independence and the rule of law in general.
Since assuming office, the Macri government was more respectful of judicial
independence than the previous Kirchner governments. Though in the case of
Supreme Court judges (mentioned in the section on separation of powers), Macri had
to be kept on track by civil society, the media and even his allies.
Notwithstanding, the judiciary is still plagued by corruption, delays and inefficiency,
and burdened by scores of tenured but incompetent judges. These problems are more
severe at the provincial level where governors prefer to have friendly courts in place
during their administration. Argentine law allows for fair trials, a right that is
generally enforced by the judiciary.
Police misconduct is endemic, including torture and brutality against suspects in
custody. In May 2016, under the justice reform package “Justice 2020,” the Macri
administration said it would create a national mechanism to prevent torture and fulfill
its obligations under the U.N. Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
The World Justice Project (WJP) Rule of Law Index 2016 ranked Argentina’s judicial
system 51 out of 113 countries, with an overall score of 0.55, and 14 out of 30
countries in Latin America, an improvement on previous years.
In the 2015 Latinobarómetro survey, only 1% of the Argentine respondents stated
that the judiciary performs well, while 53% stated that the judiciary performs poorly
and 45% stated that the judiciary has severe flaws.
Independent
judiciary
7
BTI 2018 | Argentina 11
Macri declared the fight against corruption to be a priority and has undertaken the
first steps in this area, including giving greater autonomy to the Anti-Corruption
Office (Oficina Anti-Corrupción, OA). Prosecution of abuses of public office has
become more intense and has strong public backing following the endemic corruption
of the Kircher years, the “Lava Jato” scandal in Brazil, Wikileaks revelations and
even alleged cases affecting the Macri government. The OA is active in these causes
and even the Comptroller General of the Nation is called to take part in investigations
that affect the credibility of the executive (e.g., the debt agreement concerning the
postal company, which had been owned by the Macri group between 1997 and 2003).
The most spectacular ongoing cases of alleged corruption include those of former
President Fernández, former Vice-President Amado Boudou and José Lopez, deputy
minister for public works under the two Kirchners. López was arrested after trying to
conceal $8.9 million in a convent. The scandal prompted Macri to denounce
“incredible” levels of corruption during the 12 years of Kirchner governments.
Notwithstanding these advances, Macri himself incurred suspicion because he was
the only Latin American president to appear in the “Panama Papers” on April 2016,
but on closer inspection the revelations did not appear too damaging for him.
Overall, compared to previous years, the situation has improved following the change
in government. Subsequently, the prosecution of abuses of public office now follow
the rule of the law and less the considerations of political opportunity. However,
while this change served as an incentive to re-activate “sleeping” cases that had
previously been dropped, this development also casts doubts on the judiciary’s
assertiveness over longer periods of time or under changing political circumstances.
Prosecution of
office abuse
7
Civil rights and liberties are constitutionally guaranteed, and comprise equality
before the law, equal access to justice and due process under rule of law. However,
since both the police and the judiciary are politicized, corrupt, poorly paid and
inefficient, legal action taken to remedy violations of these civil rights and liberties
is usually inadequate. The excessive use of force by police and other security forces
has been reported as a recurrent problem. The situation in jails is also problematic
due to severe overcrowding and the poor quality of basic services. In addition, torture
continues to be a serious issue in prison and detention centers. The Argentine military
and the police are hesitant to government enforcement of human rights, and national
and provincial governments have been unable to change the prevailing culture in the
security forces, with repeated failures to reform police forces known to be corrupt
and complicit in criminal activity
Another issue of primary concern for Argentines is public security, especially in
Buenos Aires. Much of the increase in the level of violent crime as well as the
perception that crime is a problem increased markedly has been fueled by a growth
in illegal drug use, and by the complicity of high-ranking judicial and law
enforcement authorities in the drug trade. There are national and local ombudsmen
tasked with aiding citizens and whose rights are violated by the state, but their role is
Civil rights
7
BTI 2018 | Argentina 12
de facto very limited for low-income and other socially marginalized people. There
is a growing anti-Semitism and xenophobia against immigrants from the Andean
countries and Asia.
Although the participation of women in politics, guaranteed by the “cupo feminino,”
is the highest in Latin America, salaries and conditions of work continue to be lower
for women than for men in the private sector, and the number of women on the
executive level remains insufficient. In 2015 and 2016, violence against women
increased dramatically. In 2015, 235 women were killed in gender-based violence
incidents in Argentina. As a reaction, in August 2016, President Macri announced a
National Plan for the Eradication of Violence against Women with the aim of putting
into force a 2009 law.
Forced labor in some industrial sectors, the agriculture sector, and among street
venders and domestic workers remains a problem. Men, women and children are
subject of sex trafficking, funding for programs to assist victims is insufficient.
Discrimination against indigenous people remains a concern. Reports of torture and
other ill-treatment were not investigated.
4 | Stability of Democratic Institutions
Democratic institutions at federal, provincial and local level, including the
administrative system and the judiciary, have recovered step by step from the 2001
to 2002 crisis. However, their effective functioning is still not sufficiently guaranteed,
and their interrelationships are not entirely smooth. The presidencies of both
Kirchners were characterized by a significant concentration of executive power at the
expense of other democratic institutions and the division of powers.
The system of formal and informal incentives contained within the country’s political
system ensures that obstruction of the government is more profitable for the
opposition than cooperation. The “localization” and decentralization of politics
emerged without the parallel development of a solid party system on the national
level, and without institutional mechanisms that typically constitute a countervailing
power to these centrifugal tendencies.
The unity of the Peronist party during the Kirchner governments disappeared
following the surprising defeat of the Peronist candidate Daniel Scioli in the 2015
presidential election. But this change has only moderated the super-presidentialism
and not motivated the new center-right president, Macri, to definitively renounce the
use of presidential decrees. On the other hand, Macri practices a much more
cooperative style of governance than his Peronist predecessors. He seems to respect
the division of powers more, attempts to find alliance partners through dialog and
with some success has undermined the coherence of the Peronist opposition. This
new policy style and strategic behavior enabled Macri to not only achieve some ad
Performance of
democratic
institutions
7
BTI 2018 | Argentina 13
hoc arrangements with the support of moderate Peronists under the leadership of
Sergio Massa, but also to establish a solid base of cooperation with governors, a
powerful veto group in Argentina. This base of cooperation may erode in the election
year 2017.
The relevant actors accept democratic institutions as legitimate, but do not always
actively support them. Notwithstanding the concentration of power, the core
institutions of Argentine democracy remain undisputed. Elections are clean (with a
few exceptions), civil liberties are broadly protected and veto powers are
comparatively weak. The military, responsible for six coups between 1930 and 1976,
has withdrawn from politics. The constitutional order has not been interrupted since
Argentina’s return to democracy. The surprising government change in the 2015
elections, from the leftist Peronist government to the center-right coalition
Cambiemos led by Macri, proceeded peacefully and within the democratic rules of
game. It is too early, however, to judge if this reflects a change of the political elite’s
“culture” toward unconditionally abiding by the rules of the game.
Commitment to
democratic
institutions
8
5 | Political and Social Integration
The party system is fairly stable, socially rooted, moderately fragmented and
polarized. Volatility is also moderate. The traditional structure of Argentina’s party
system, characterized by competition between Peronism (PJ) and Radicalism (UCR),
were maintained during the Kirchner and Fernández presidencies, although the walls
between the two camps have become increasingly porous. The electorate increasingly
votes for output-oriented agendas and largely does not follow ideological cleavages.
Each party contains its respective left and right wings, which often led to ferocious
intra-party conflicts. Given that Cambiemos, as a pragmatic pro-market coalition, is
less ideologically defined, this situation is about to change. The electoral system
favors the periphery at the expense of the urban centers, and Peronism and Radicalism
at the expense of third parties. Néstor Kirchner was the last Peronist able to unite the
subdivisions of the party, and his loss left a fragmented Peronist movement. The UCR
has been fighting for survival since the disaster of President de la Rúa in 2001, and
remains in disarray.
Since 2013, we observe a re-alignment in the party system which culminated in the
October 2015 elections. These elections represented a watershed moment in the
country’s political history and changed the landscape of Argentine political life. With
Cambiemos, a coalition composed of Civic Coalition (CC), Republican Proposal
(PRO) led by Macri and the Radical Civic Union (UCR), there is now a strong centerright coalition party in Argentina. The leadership of Cambiemos is decidedly
“porteño” (of Buenos Aires) in origin, pro-market in ideological orientation and led
by members of the country’s economic elite. Moreover, the coalition had the ability
to win votes among the poor. Consequently, the coalition won not only the presidency
Party system
7
BTI 2018 | Argentina 14
in November 2015, but also the governorship of Buenos Aires province by four
percentage points (39% to 35%). Notably, this province contains 38% of all
Argentine voters. In addition, the voters rejected Peronist mayoral incumbents in half
of the cities in the Buenos Aires province. For the first time in Argentine history, the
same party can control the city of Buenos Aires, the province of Buenos Aires (where
a non-Peronist governor has not been elected since 1983) and the presidency. The
strategy of Cambiemos is to build a base of volunteers that the party has recruited
from NGOs, the business community and private universities.
The existent network of associations reflects most social interests and is to some
extent able to mediate between society and the political system. However, it is
relatively fragmented and dominated by a few strong interest groups, above all
business organizations and trade unions, producing a latent risk of pooling conflicts.
Organized labor continues to be dominated by Peronist trade unions. The CGT as the
most prominent actor has been recurrently plagued by internal struggles. Since 2012,
CGT’s thorny relationship with former president Fernández resulted in a three-way
split that helped dilute the trade union’s power. A number of labor protests and strikes
were carried out in in the first half of 2016 in sectors such as oil and gas,
transportation, education, and public workers. Among their demands, trade unions
sought better terms in tri-partite salary negotiations, most of which were concluded
by late June of the same year with salary rises above 30%, too little given an inflation
rate of 40%.
On August 22, the CGT reached a turning point. After years of internal struggles
among the three competing factions, its leaders concluded a reunification process that
will strengthen the trade union’s mobilization capacity, and bargaining power vis-avis both governments and business associations. For Macri this is a defeat. In his
battle to outflank the trade unions and avoid a general strike, Macri announced at the
beginning of August 2016 a health care reform, including the reimbursement of funds
to obras sociales (social insurance) schemes organized by the trade unions.
The relations with the employers, which had worsened during the second term of
Fernández, began to improve with the first measures of the new government (e.g., a
reduction in export taxes, exchange rate liberalization and an arrangement with bond
holders). But businesses are also directly affected by trade union pressure for salary
rises, and by road blocks and strikes. The evaluation of the business sector by citizens
is mixed: 39% are convinced that entrepreneurs perform well, while 53% have a poor
or very poor opinion of entrepreneurs.
Interest groups
7
Approval levels for democratic norms and procedures continue to be fairly high.
According to Latinobarómetro 2015, about 70% of Argentine respondents stated that
democracy is preferable to any other kind of government (2010: 83%; 2013: 68%),
while 55.4% agree and 31.6% strongly agree that the future of the country depends
of competitive elections. Only a small rate of 4.8% had participated in unauthorized
Approval of
democracy
9
BTI 2018 | Argentina 15
protests, 18.5% declared that they may participate in unauthorized protests, while
74.3% stated they would never participate in unauthorized protests.
Political protests do not target the political class as a whole, as protests had during
the 2001 to 2002 crisis, but are focused on specific policy issues and rarely question
the constitutional framework. Of Argentine respondents, 36% stated that the liberty
to participate in politics is guaranteed, 72% stated that elections are important and
57% stated that the last elections were clean or very clean. Meanwhile, 86% of
respondents stated that they had participated in the last federal elections and 25.4%
stated that they were ready to defend democracy by participating in protests.
However, public distrust of democratic institutions, and public perceptions that
democratic institutions are unrepresentative and ineffective has not disappeared. Only
32.1% of respondents stated that they felt represented by the government and only
24.6% by the parliament, while 69% of respondents stated political parties performed
poorly or very poorly. In general, there is a wide gap between the general acceptance
of democratic institutions and judgments about their functioning. Overall, 71.4% of
respondents stated that the country is governed by powerful groups with strong selfinterest and 43% stated that no progress had been made in tackling corruption in
public institutions.
The sense of solidarity and trust among the population, and the confidence in the
institutions of social and political representation have declined since 2012.
Interpersonal confidence is chronically low. According to the Barómetro de la Deuda
Social Argentina 2016 by the Argentine Catholic University of Buenos Aires, there
is a clear gap between the lack of public confidence in governance and political
representation on the one hand, and the increase in public confidence in civil society
organizations between 2010 and 2015.
Fundamental social norms are poorly developed and Argentina has been described as
“an anomic society.” Formal institutions are undermined by informal rules, personal
connections (“amiguismo”) and loyalties. According to Latinobarómetro 2015, only
22.4% of respondents stated that one can trust other persons. Rule-flouting
individualism and interest groups determine behavior. Overall, 67.1% of respondents
were convinced that people do not normally say what they think, while 38% stated
that solidarity with poor and marginalized groups is not guaranteed.
The perception of the political process as a zero-sum-game where the “winner takes
all” is widely internalized and reflected in Fernández’s slogan “Vamos por todo.”
Compromises are considered a defeat. Societal polarization increased over recent
years. It is too early to evaluate if Macri’s more cooperative and dialog-oriented
government style has reduced polarization in Argentine society.